# Ch 8. Nationalism and Economic Development

## The Era of Good Feelings

James Monroe's presidency can be seen as an Era of Good Feelings. Monroe's frequent touring and performative demonstration of being personable and relatable made the one party system more palatable and acceptable for Americans. This time period largely avoided political conflict, demonstrated in the painting "Return of Monroe to Washington from a Northern Excursion" by Pietro Bonanni, where Monroe is shown returning to Washington to the delight and excitement of crowds waiting to greet him. The piece, though solemn, presents anticipatory, as though something important is about to happen. However, it is important to note that all of the people depicted appear to be wealthy, white males. Native Americans did not fare so well under the Monroe administration, as the United States continued to encroach upon their territory, adding Mississippi, Illinois, Alabama, Maine, and Missouri to the union. Although the Monroe presidency did seek to make peace with the Native American tribes, as seen in the gifts exchanged, the medallion and hand-beaded pouch, the fact that their land was encroached upon and way of life slowly decimated eventually had an incalculable negative effect. Although the Missouri Compromise must have appeared to be viable at the time, it also eventually sowed the seeds for conflict in the coming civil war. Finally, Monroe's presidency saw the growth of a market economy, which created a business cycle, eventually leading to the Panic of 1819. Monroe argued that this was a natural part of the growth of healthy economy, and while it probably was for the wealthy who owned the businesses, it probably impacted the most vulnerable workers negatively, likely losing their jobs. Altogether, though Monroe's presidency was likely a prosperous era for many, it also sowed the seeds for conflict, particularly for Native Americans and slaves. 
