# Discussion Questions

1. Malcolm Gladwell is interested in what makes some people more successful than others. Overall, how would you describe his thesis, or central premise? Do you agree or disagree with his ideas?
    - Gladwell's thesis is that the factors which cause someone to become successful a primarily driven by the opportunities they have access to and the legacy of where they come from and the culture they were brought up in. I think the first part, opportunity, of his thesis is so completely obvious that I'm almost suspicious of why he would simultaneously act as though it's a profound revelation while phrasing it in such an incontrovertibly true way. He says that "I want to convince you that these kinds of personal explanations of success don’t work. People don’t rise from nothing.", suggesting that his purpose is to oppose the "rags-to-riches" mentality, but I feel like he's arguing against a strawman here. No one believe that "people rise from nothing", they merely believe that the rise was justified.
    - I'm more skeptical of the second part of his thesis, legacy. While again, at face value it's incontrovertible that "culture affects one's chances of success", I think it is far easier to fall victim to sophistry and stereotyping here, and having finished the book, it seems like that is exactly what happens. 

2. What does Gladwell mean by the term "outlier"?
    - It's actually somewhat vague what exactly Gladwell means by Outlier. In the appendix of the book, he explains that "'Outlier' is a scientific term to describe things or phenomena that lie outside normal experience". Outlier is often defined as being greater than 1.5 interquartile ranges away from the 1st or 3rd quadrant of a data set, or by being more than 3 standard deviations away from the mean. However, the entire book pointedly contains no actual statistics (Gladwell freely admits he does not remember how to calculate the slope of a line, though in jest). 
    - Instead, Gladwell seems to be interested in people who are considered outliers by some entirely subjective criterion. Often, this is fame or acclaim within ones' discipline, like Bill Gates or Warren Buffet or famous hockey players. But at other times, this definition is grossly relaxed, as Gladwell seems to consider Ratwatte, the seemingly normal Sri Lankan pilot, an outlier. And once again, he also considers the woman Renee an outlier, when all she did was spend 20 minutes trying to figure out middle school algebra. Basically, an outlier for Gladwell is literally whatever he wants it to be for the chapter to work. 

3. Why does Gladwell insist that IQ is not the determining factor in one's ability to achieve success? What does he mean when he suggests that IQ reaches a point of diminishing returns after reaching 130?
    - NOTE: I actually agree with Gladwell's point here. IQ isn't a particularly good metric for determining success. Gladwell just does a laughably terrible_ job defending his argument.
    - Gladwell argues, more or less based on a single study, that IQ functions as a threshold. He points out that in this study of students with IQs over 130, most of them did not go on to be radically more successful. He, with unnecessarily dramatic rhetoric, explains that the results of Terman's study showed that there was not a statistically significant difference between IQs over 130 and everyone else. 
    - Amusingly, he contradicts himself here, but in a different part of Chapter 3, he once again argues using overly condescending rhetoric, that "Intelligence has a threshold.". Given that someone's IQ passes a certain value, argues Gladwell, their chances of success would not increase merely from them having a higher IQ. Of course, if the results of Terman's study were true, that would contradict this quote from Hudson.


4. Gladwell draws upon Robert Sternberg's idea of "practical intelligence." What is practical intelligence, and how does it differ from IQ?
    - Gladwell describes practical intelligence as the ability to be able to convince people to do things to help you, unconciously. It differs from IQ, in that its utilization is entirely unconcious, and it is used to indirectly furthur ones own ends. Notably, Gladwell correctly uses the mathematicaly term "orthogonal" here! I guess he learned from his "Igon Value" mistake from a couple books ago.
    - Gladwell argues that practical intelligence often derives from ones socioeconomic status. Poor and marginalized people are often unable or unwilling to speak up, while middle class people are more likely to stand up to authority, and upper class people rely on their parents money to carry them through. Ignoring the sweeping overgeneralizations made from a handful of anecdotes, these trends are probably at least somewhat accurate. 

5. According to Gladwell, what is the reason that Asians excel at mathematics? Discuss the cultural and educational differences that he points to as explanation.
    - Ok, I'll be honest, this was the one chapter in the book where I genuinely laughed out loud while reading it. I honestly still can't fully believe this chapter isn't satire. But anyway, Gladwell's thesis seems to be that "the difficulty of maintaining rice paddies in ancient China led to the development of a culture of hardwork, which allows Chinese people to be better at math". Also, apparently their numers are shorter and adding them is more intuitive.
    - Lets start with the numbers being shorter. Just to begin with, [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_numerals#Standard_numbers) reveals that Chinese numbesr are _not_ in fact significantly shorter. The digits 1-9 in English are almost also all 1 syllable, except for seven (which is the example Gladwell happens to use). But even if they were, it wouldn't explain why other groups, like Indian or Middle Eastern immigrants, who despite also being quite good at math, do not speak Chinese. As someone who speaks Bengali and is familiar with Hindi numerals, I can inform you that our numbers are not in fact shorter than English, and are quite similar. Additionally, this wouldn't explain even first generation immigrants being good at math, because first generation immigrants to the US tend to do math in English, not their native tongue. As one of those first generation immigrants, I can assure you that if someone asks me what "পঁয়ত্রিশ এবং সাতচল্লিশ"  is, I'm converting that to English first before giving them the answer as "বিরাশি".
    - Then, Gladwell hits us with this amazing sentence, "The number system in English is highly irregular. Not so in China, Japan, and Korea. They have a logical counting system. Eleven is ten-one. Twelve is ten-two. Twenty-four is two-tens-four and so on.". Does he not understand how Arabic numbers work? In English, the suffix "ty" or "teen" is used to imply "tens". Like this is literally not how linguistics work. And the one time he cites an expert in this field, she literally does not even support his point. She says "I think that it makes the whole attitude toward math different. Instead of being a rote learning thing, there’s a pattern I can figure out." Which is a _cultural statement_, not a linguistic one! I honestly feel like this whole section is just Gladwell trying to cope with the fact that he doesn't understand math.
    - And look, he now cites neo-Nazi Richard Lynn, whose been debunked literally dozens of times and is not taken seriously by any academic.
    - Anyway, now we finally get to the meat of this chapter. Gladwell displays several impressive levels of stupid here.

> Historically, Western agriculture is “mechanically” oriented. In the West, if a farmer wanted to become more efficient or increase his yield, he introduced more and more sophisticated equipment, which allowed him to replace human labor with mechanical labor: a threshing machine, a hay baler, a combine harvester, a tractor. He cleared another field and increased his acreage, because now his machinery allowed him to work more land with the same amount of effort. 

Right, cause Chinese and Japnaese farmers never used technology to improve their farming yields. Oh wait, terracing, bunds, canals, small reservoirs, and wooden tools have been used since 800 BC, and iron tools have been found as early as 200 BC. 

> Throughout history, not surprisingly, the people who grow rice have always worked harder than almost any other kind of farmer. That last statement may seem a little odd, because most of us have a sense that everyone in the premodern world worked really hard. But that simply isn’t true.

Gladwell then supports this statement with by refuting a strawman. He brings up hunter-gatherers but that's not the point being made. The idea that everyone in the premodern world worked really hard is referring to post-Agricultural revolution. But as we'll find out, Gladwell doesn't care much for history.

> And, most of all, it’s autonomous. The peasants of Europe worked essentially as low-paid slaves of an aristocratic landlord, with little control over their own destinies. But China and Japan never developed that kind of oppressive feudal system, because feudalism simply can’t work in a rice economy.

Excuse me, what the fuck? Did he fall asleep in middle school history? Medieval Japan was feudal between the 12th and 17th centuries: https://www.ancient.eu/article/1438/feudalism-in-medieval-japan/. And China existed under various forms of feudalism, starting from the [Zhou dynasty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fengjian#%22Feudalism%22_and_Chinese_Marxism), all the way up to Mao. And what about [India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_feudalism)? That was feudal up until the Mughals invaded. This is almost more embarrassing than Igon Value.

And then he goes on listing some ancient Chinese proverbs. Cause no other society has ever had proverbs about working hard. "I find that the harder I work, the more luck I seem to have." ~ Thomas Jefferson. It's not like the entire premise of the book is that Americans are too fixated on personal hard-work as an explanation for success.

And finally, lets just contemplate the absurdity of this. "Hundreds of years ago, some people farmed rice, and they had to work hard, which is why Asian immigrants".


Anyway, so lets now talk about what the actual, sociological consensus is for why Asians are better at math. This article from "The Conservation" describes how Asians discusses how Asians have been boxed into being "model minority", as a result of U.S. Immigration policy following World War II: https://theconversation.com/asians-are-good-at-math-why-dressing-up-racism-as-a-compliment-just-doesnt-add-up-128731. Additionally, the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model_minority#Asian_Americans) on the subject of model minorities discusses the issue pretty well. 

In summary, the consensus is that as a result of economic decimation and colonialism, middle class people in Asia and Africa began to realize that their best hope of upward economic mobility lay in moving to the US. Because the only way to come to the US as an immigrant following WWII was by work visas, which usually involved the company demonstrating specific excellent talent that couldn't be found in the US, a cutthroat culture developed in Asia and Africa. This fierce competition created a culture where intelligence, specifically the ability to do well on tests, was valued immensely, and this culture was so ingrained in the immigrants that arrived in the US that their children received the same pressure, and school was considered the most important thing in the child's life. These parents would regularly spend extra money on tutoring, would modify their schedules and make sacrifices to ensure their child was doing as well as physically possible in school, and the children were expected to reciprocate that effort. This framework also better explains the similar behavior exhibited in Africans who immigrated to the US post-WWII, and the lower prevalence of this behavior in 2nd or 3rd generation immigrants.


6. Why does Gladwell feel there is no such thing as a self-made person. Do you agree? Can you name people who overcame great odds—circumstances not in their favor—to attain success? What about those people that Gladwell offers in support of his argument (Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, or the Beatles, among others)? Do you agree with his assessment that much depends on timing?
    - Gladwell believes there is no such thing as a self made person, because the opportunities that one had access to are often largely coincidental. People like J.K. Rowling and Barack Obama both appear to fit the rags-to-riches story, but it is also likely true that timing played an integral role in both their stories. Had Rowling been older, she would not have been able to dedicate nearly as much time to a fantasy story that was rejected by most publishes, and had Obama been younger, he would have faced a significantly harder path towards the presidency.

7. Do Gladwell's many anecdotes prove his hypothesis? Or do his stories exemplify his ideas? Is there a difference...if so, what? Some critics suggest that Gladwell cherry-picks his facts in order to support his premise. Is that a valid observation or not?
    - Anecdotes _cannot_ prove a hypothesis. I think I've made it abundantly clear that I think Gladwell does a terrible job proving his points, he doesn't actually include any real statistical analysis, and while reading it, I found myself saying "That's not a p-value" far too often, whenever Gladweel said something like "the data was unequivocal". This is particularly heinous at the end of Chapter 2, when he literally just lists off "famous people who were born around the time that I say they would have to be born". This gives the aesthetics of science, without any of the rigor or math associated with it.
    - However, considering the immense popularity of Gladwell's books, it seems clear that his anecdotes definitely do exemplify his ideas very well, and that seems to be enough for the millions who buy his books.
    - And yes, at best, he cherry picks facts to support his premises. I would go further and say that he often misrepresents them, or literally just makes them up. At the end of Chapter 5, he literally just starts listing off Jewish lawyers with no apparent connection, and then states his thesis as fact. The data is misrepresented, and he leaves the question hanging, for his audience to fill in whatever narrative they want.


8. Is Gladwell suggesting that success is a matter of luck, the roll of the die? If so—if success depends on timing, birth, and opportunities—then do innate qualities (ambition or raw talent) have any role to play?
    - It seems Gladwell is suggesting that success is a matter of luck, or at least of environment. And while Gladwell mentions talent several times, I would go further to question whether a concept such as "ambition" even innately exists. What does it even mean for someone to have an innate quality? That is was genetic? That they developed it before 6 months? That they developed it before 1 year? What about "innate" qualities that people develop later in life? How can we isolate them from their "surroundings"? Is it even a useful question to ask whether such a thing exists as a "person" that is fundamentally separate from an independent of their surroundings? This concept, referred to as non-dualism is often discussed within a religious context, particularly Hinduism and Buddhism, but there's also quite a bit of philosophical discussion here in traditional Western philosophy as well.

9. What personal experiences—people and incidents in your own life—can you think of that support or challenge Gladwell's ideas?
    - Here's a story relevant to STEM: Back when I was in 4th grade, and a bunch of my friends from JFK and I were all applying to STEM, I, and a couple of others were accepted. Many of my friends were not, and some of were pointedly annoyed by that, with many suggestions that entrance to STEM should be merit based, the results of a test, rather than the lottery, because, we, as the "smart kids" should be given more opportunities. What I realized after being at STEM for a few years is that the process is reciprocal -- many of the students whom I'd condescendingly written off as "not smart" back in 5th grade, I realized in 7th grade had become "good students". It was around this time that I also noticed for the first time that at STEM, there was pretty much no one who I severely object to doing a group project with. And what I realized is the very fact that these students were able to attend STEM, where they were given significantly more time to with science and math, had significantly more opportunity to improve themselves, was the reason for this. The opportunity and expectations placed on a group of people affect their success as much as any essentialist characteristics.

10. What did you find most surprising, humorous or thought-provoking in Gladwell's book? Any "ah-ha!" moments? Any-thing strike you as dubious? Have you come away thinking differently than before? What, if anything, do you feel you've learned?
    - The surprising parts were mostly just how flagrant he was with his bad statistics and dumb statements. No real a-ha moments, almost all of it was super obvious. And a _ton_ strikes me as dubious. Here's one I haven't mentioned yet: All of chapter 7, where interpreted charitably, he says "hierarchical social expectations have a detrimental effect on cooperative activities". Unfortunately, I can't interpret it charitably, because in the chapter, he conflates "Korean" and "Asian" a bunch of times, keeps using "Western culture" as the example of a non-hierarchical society (I've only ever heard "Western culture" used as a euphemism for "white people"), and heavily insinuates American superiority.

11. Gladwell gives differing definitions of intelligence. Yet his definition of success is singular—"worldy" success in terms of of wealth, power, and fame. Are there also differing definitions of success that Gladwell doesn't consider? If so, what are they, and what does it take to achieve those versions of success?
    - Absolutely. At no point does Gladwell even mention "happiness" or "satisfaction". Its often said that money can't buy happiness, and while this definitely isn't true if you're living under the poverty line, the evidence suggests that happiness becomes significantly less strongly correlated with money after a certain threshold -- somewhere between 70 and 90 thousand dollars annually in the US (with obvious vast regional differences. In Silicon Valley, the number is closer to $200,000). And what if you view the pursuit of knowledge, for its own sake in a goal? Many scientists have rejected wealth or fame, or given way inventions they could have made millions off of for free. Helping other people, or society as a whole might be considered a worthy goal in and of itself.

12. What are the take aways from the reading? What did Gladwell neglect to mention? Look at? Are there any holes in his argument?
    - Takeaways: It's very easy to draw whatever conclusions you want if you cherry-pick data and use anecdotes effectively. Additionally, building ethos is _incredibly_ important in writing. Something Gladwell did pretty regularly is include a long, mildly engaging diatribe summarizing the Wikipedia article in order to introduce something. Often, this had absolutely no bearing on his larger audience, but it did a brilliant job of building ethos, giving the impression, "trust me. I've done my research", leading you to subconsciously read the rest of the chapter significantly less critically. 
    - Gladwell significantly downplays the effects of class. He addresses the subtle impact of class on one's resistance to authority to get what you want, but he doesn't address it on a wider scale. If you're living in an Indian village and have to wake up at 4 to walk 3 hours just to get water, there is no way your ever becoming famous or successful in an industrialized country, no matter how hard you try. Gladwell barely mentions the plethora of connections that more wealthy people have; there's a reason that every single Trump got into an Ivy League, and it's not cause they're just genetically more intelligent than the rest of us. 
