Hi, my name is Ritoban Roy-Chowdhury. I'm currently a high school student (junior), studying at the Riverside STEM Academy. I live in Riverside, in the Orangecrest area. I have a younger brother, and my parents are both first generation immigrants from India. I have taken several online classes before. Last semester, I took a computer science course online at RCC, and before that, I took several online Spanish courses through RUSD's virtual school. In general, I've found that online courses aren't really that bad as long as you stay up to date with the work assigned, though unfortunately, you don't really get the connections that you would in person normally. 

I can play a musical instrument -- I've played piano since I was pretty young, around 5-6. Currently, I'm going through the Royal Conservatory's testing program, and am currently preparing for my level 7 exam. Of course, that means I'm fairly comfortable reading music. I also played clarinet in my middle school band for 4 years, though unfortunately, I wasn't able to continue that into high school because of scheduling conflicts. 

In terms of other hobbies, I enjoy programming. Recently, I've been working on a photorealistic 3d renderer, that can render scenes in 3d. I've also been messing around with other types of simulation -- I was recently learning about an algorithm for simulating galaxies, and was hoping to make a cool visualization out that soon. I also quite enjoy reading, mostly fantasy and sci-fi, though recently, I've grown to appreciate classics more. Regardless, I quite enjoy music, it's very relaxing, something stationary and grounded that I can come back to after a crazy day staring at a computer screen. 
