# Part 1 Essay
Tempo and dynamics play a crucial role in creating an emotional response to music. Tempo refers to speed of the music, usually measured in beats per minute and described by an Italian word or phrase, like allegro (fast) or andante (at a walking pace). Dynamics refer to the volume or loudness of the music. Dynamics are usually noted with an f for forte, meaning loud, or a p for piano, meaning soft. Multiple f's or p's, like ff, meaning fortissimo, or pp, meaning pianissimo,  can be used to mean "very loud" or "very soft". Alternatively, mf and mp mean mezzo forte and mezzo piano, respectively, which mean moderately loud or moderately soft. Tempo and dynamics are the most significant contributors to the emotion and musical feel of a piece. For example, a fanfare like Battle Hymn of the Republic, might be written in forte, because its meant to be lively and rousing, while a more mellow or muted piece, like Greensleeves might be written in piano. Composers might also vary dynamics throughout a piece. In Beethoven's Symphony No. 5, the piece opens with with a 4 note motive marked fortissimo -- very loud. This motive is repeated once more a whole step down, but then, the dynamics change to piano, the tempo increases, and the music seems to shift away from its dramatic opening into a lighter, more spry, and quieter melody. 

Tempo is also used by composers to build emotion in a piece. For example, a movie or Tom-and-Jerry cartoon might play a rapid piece of music during a chase scene, but then shift to a slower, more deliberate and dramatic piece during a tense exchange between two characters. As a specific example, consider the traditional hymn Amazing Grace. It has a relatively slow tempo, which reflects the soulful and deliberate nature of the music. In contrast to that, the Star Spangled Banner has a fairly rapid tempo. The piece moves along at a brisk pace, apt for a national anthem that might be played before sports games or important speeches. Tempo and dynamic changes often go together, as composers use both in tandem to create a specific emotional effect. A composer might have a loud but slow and deliberate section, which might be followed by a quiet but rapid section. Tempo and dynamics are a crucial aspect of music. Without them, music would feel largely unemotional and boring. 

Works Cited

Forney, Kristine, et al. The Enjoyment of Music. W. W. Norton and Company, 2018.

