# Part 6 Essay

Option 3: Discuss American music in the early 20th century. How were composers like Charles Ives and Aaron Copland different from their European counterparts of the same time-frame? Give specific musical examples and styles to support your reasoning.

The early 20th century modernist movement saw the development of a distinct American character in music. Two particularly influential composers in this new American modernist patriotic music were Charles Ives and Aaron Copland. Ives, a New Englander, integrated well known musical ideas, like children's songs, patriotic tunes, and hymns into complex pieces of music. For example, his Country Band March includes allusions to London Bridge, Yankee Doodle, and Stephen Foster's My Old Kentucky Home. This tendency to include allusions to other musical work is a unique feature of Ives' composition not shared by his European counterparts. However, Ives's music is not totally unrelated to the European modernist movement, including composers like Stravinsky, Berg, and Bartok. They included ideas of polytonality and polyrhythms between different melody lines, dissonant harmony,  and more generally, both experiment with new ideas never before seen in music. 

Aaron Copland was also a unique early 20th century modernist composer. Copland focused on accurately and holistically portraying American life, highlighting the issues of economic and social struggle through his work. In Appalachian Spring, the music for a ballet choreographed by Martha Graham, Copland illustrates the celebration of a young family in their newly built farmhouse. Copland paints a picture with his music, opening on a idyllic scene portrayed by a clarinet, joined by a flute. He slowly brings in various other instruments, building up a serendipitous soundscape for the listener. The highly recognizable "Simple Gifts" tune follows this pattern as well, presenting a simple melody played by a clarinet with the rest of the orchestra steadily joining, to reflect the simplistic and serene image steadily built up painted. Unlike his European counterparts, Copland's work is much more consonant, especially when compared against Stravinsky's Rite of Spring or Shoenberg's atonality. Additionally, these two pieces are also legato, making them feel more in line with past work, like that of Mozart of Beethoven, than Stravinsky's punctilious staccato notes. However, Copland shares a couple of unique features with his European counterparts. His music is highly patriotic, very similar to Bartok's Hungarian nationalism. Copland aimed to create a music for all Americans, and his music continues to do that today, heard regularly in everything from advertisements to blockbuster films and reflecting a sense of national pride.


Works Cited

Forney, Kristine, et al. _The Enjoyment of Music_. W. W. Norton and Company, 2018.
