# Rhetorical Analysis

* Gradiose Tone Generalities, Enlightenment philosophy
* Word Choice
    - self-evident
    - "truths"
    - "rights"
* Structure of the Preamble
    - Deductive, biblical



In _The Declaration of Independence_, Thomas Jefferson, statesman and future president, justifies the argument that the 13 colonies making up America should be independent from Great Britain, and informs King George of the colonies decision to declare independence. In the introduction and preamble to the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson begins by describing Enlightenment philosophy about government, speaking in generalities about the "Course of human events", then, using powerful and effective diction, makes his argument in a deductive and logical structure, hearkening back to the Biblical story of Genesis. Jefferson's purpose is to inform not only Britain about their decision, but also to convince other colonists that this was the correct decision and to seek help from other nations, like France and Spain, in the Revolutionary War. Jefferson uses a stately and dignified tone, presenting grandiose arguments about the arc of history based on the new Enlightenment philosophy that his audience would be familiar with.

Jefferson uses a grandiose tone in the introduction and preamble, choosing to speak in generalities. In the introduction, at no point does he mention America or Britain, instead referring to them as "one people". This makes the introduction feel civil and polite, as though Jefferson is merely presenting an argument rather than fully condemning King George. By speaking in generalities, Jefferson gives the appearance that the issue is larger and more important than either America or Britain--it involves the entirety of "human events". This idea of human events reflects much of the Enlightenment philosophy that was gaining influence at time. Jefferson further invokes the Enlightenment philosophy by referring to the "Laws of Nature" and "powers of the Earth". Enlightenment philosophy, being heavily influenced by the scientific revolution, believed that there were natural laws that governed humanity much the same way as natural laws described the world in science. By alluding to the Enlightenment idea of natural laws, Jefferson once again presents his argument as larger than a petty disagreement between two countries. King George's conduct is a violation of natural law, and the colonists are setting things right again. Finally, Jefferson references Enlightenment philosophy extremely clearly in the Preamble, by bringing up "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness" as "unalienable Rights". This is a direct allusion to John Locke, a prominent Enlightenment philosopher's work, which argued that life, liberty, and property were the basic rights all men were entitled to. By making his argument appear grandiose and important, Jefferson effectively sets the tone for the rest of the piece, and establishes his argument in a way that many at the time would already agree with. 

Jefferson uses powerful and unyielding word choice throughout the declaration, causing his philosophical argument to be more impactful. One example of this can be seen in the beginning of the preamble, where he writes "We hold these truths to be self-evident". The word "self-evident" here suggests that what he's about to say is inarguable, that these statements are true at face value. Its also crucial to notice that he refers to these statements as "truths", preempting any possible counterargument. They're not "opinions" or "philosophical conclusions", they are merely "truths". Jefferson's word choice is powerful, leading the reader onto the conclusion without them even noticing, agreeing at each step of the way, because he's just presenting "truths". Another example of Jefferson's effective use of diction can be found in the fourth proposition in the Preamble, where he presents a counterargument, "Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes". By addressing this counterargument, Jefferson illustrates that the colonists are not acting recklessly and that they have indeed considered whether their actions are prudent. Rather than acting recklessly, the colonists are acting in a stately and dignified manner, in line with the tone of the overall piece. [TODO] Jefferson's effective use of diction leads the reader through, supporting his conclusions at each step.

The Preamble is structured as 5 propositions within a deductive argument, concluding with justifying the American Revolution. He begins with a general, grandiose statement deriving from Enlightenment philosophy, that "all men are created equal" and have the rights of "Life, Liberty, and pursuit of Happiness". He then explains that the purpose of government is to "secure these rights", so a government failing to do so ought to be "alter[ed] or abolish[ed]." He then presents a counterargument, establishing that the causes for abolishing a government must not be "light and transient", but ends with a scathing conclusion, accusing King George of a "long train of abuses and usurpations" with the goal of "reduc[ing] them under absolute Despotism". The first four propositions are presented entirely within the abstract, as pure philosophy. But then, once the reader has already agreed to all the philosophy, Jefferson hits them with the crucial piece: that the colonists have a "duty" to overthrow the King. The building up of each of these rights creates structural unity, with each premise building up off the previous. Additionally, this structure loosely invokes the Biblical archetype in Genesis in the Fall of Man. First, mankind is created, and a government is instituted. But when that government (or mankind) falls, a new order must be created and built up from scratch to maintain their "Safety and Happiness". By using this structure, Jefferson makes his argument feel very natural, creating a narrative that the reader or listener is already familiar with and can easily follow. By using this deductive structure, Jefferson is able to very naturally build up his argument.  

Jefferson uses a grandiose tone invoking Enlightenment philosophy, with powerful diction and a deductively structured argument in order to effectively demonstrate why the United States must separate from Great Britain. By utilizing the philosophy of the time, Jefferson guides the reader through his argument, presenting a coherent narrative, with firm and unyielding diction at each point along the journey. The Declaration of Independence is one of America's founding documents, and by better understanding it, we can seek to improve this country and truly achieve the vision set out for us in the intellectual legacy of the Enlightenment. 



