# Personal Essay #1

 6.  Think about an academic subject that inspires you. Describe how you have furthered this interest inside and/or outside of the classroom. 

 > Things to consider:  Many students have a passion for one specific academic subject area, something that they just can’t get enough of. If that applies to you, what have you done to further that interest? Discuss how your interest in the subject developed and describe any experience you have had inside and outside the classroom — such as volunteer work, internships, employment, summer programs, participation in student organizations and/or clubs — and what you have gained from your involvement.

> Has your interest in the subject influenced you in choosing a major and/or future career? Have you been able to pursue coursework at a higher level in this subject (honors, AP, IB, college or university work)? Are you inspired to pursue this subject further at UC, and how might you do that?


Ever since I was 8, I've been fascinated by computers and computer programming. Really, it probably started all the way back in 1st grade, when my dad showed me how to use Microsoft Word for a "research paper" on giraffes, but my interest in programming was kindled a couple years later. My mother works as a software designer, and my father is a professor of electrical and computer engineering, so when I asked them to show me some basic programming, they were more than happy to oblige. My mother showed me some basic SQL commands, while my father gave me a short demo of loops and if statements in MATLAB, neither of which I understood. Not to be deterred, a plucky 8 year old me would not give up. I spent an entire weekend reading through the simplest C++ tutorial I could find, meticulously working through each example. Over the years, I've worked on numerous personal projects. In 4th grade, a handful of friends and I tried to make a game in C++, and then, through middle school, I learnt C# with the Unity Game Engine. For a while, I was fascinated by cybersecurity and cryptography, having always preferred hands-on learning, I taught myself through a series of increasingly difficult crypto challenges, and participated in several security competitions. 

Fast forward several years, to today. Throughout high school, I've taken several opportunities to learn more about programming at our local universities. I took a C++ course at a local university over the summer, and am taking another data structures course right now. I've started using the Rust programming language, using it to make a chess AI and 3d renderer. I completed the Advent of Code programming challenges in both 2019 and 2020, and hope to continue it each year. But more important than anything I've taught myself, is what I've been able to give back to the school. Just this year, our programming club, STEMDev, a member of the national organization HackClub, grew to over 20 members. With several new students, completely new to programming, I taught them the basics of Python, and am now guiding them through their first programming projects. It's been incredibly exciting watching a handful of completely new programmers, discover a completely new world with endless creative possibilities. I'm extremely honored to be Vice President this year, and extremely proud of our accomplishments so far, and our plans for the rest of the year, as we attend competitions, build cool and exciting new apps, investigate new aspects of computer science, and  just have fun. 
