# Gandhi Rhetorical Analysis

* First person
* Syntax -- almost rhythmic
* Tone -- deliberate, matter of fact
    - Humble    -- ethos
    - Offering terms of discussion also develops ethos
* Precise diction




Mohandas "Mahatma" Gandhi's letter to Viceroy Lord Irwin in 1930 informs the viceroy of his Gandhi's intention to peacefully protest the iniquitous Salt Act, and more broadly outlines Gandhi's philosophy of non-violent resistance. Gandhi begins by addressing concerns about non-violence being inefficacious, working through his thoughts on the issue and explaining how he arrives at this position with love for the British, then informs the viceroy of his intentions to protest the Salt Act, and finally provides a path to peaceful discussion with the viceroy. Gandhi's tone is deliberate and matter of fact, and establishes ethos through his humility and message of peace. The intended audience, though apparently the viceroy, is likely the people in India, including the protesters and other revolutionaries like Bhagat Singh.

Gandhi establishes a tone of humility and peace, which he uses to build up his ethos and make the letter more persuasive. Right from the beginning, where other revolutionaries in India sought to incite violence and overthrow the oppressive British rule, Gandhi makes it clear that he's not interested in that. Instead, he's interested in "conversion" of the British to his cause, which he considers to be making the British "see the wrong they have done to India". In essence, instead of beating the British with force, Gandhi seeks to persuade them with his words and actions. This effectively establishes his humility; he does not see himself as better than the British or more righteous. He sees them as equals who need to be set on the right path. This theme of humility continues, as he explains that he loves the British people, and intends to use this love to "melt the stoniest hearts". Gandhi explains that, even after he realized that the British did not seek to make things better for India, even after he "conceived non-cooperation", his "object still was to serve them". This further establishes his humility, illustrating to the Viceroy Lord Irwin and the Indian public that Gandhi is beseeching them to listen, making him all the more persuasive. 

Having effectively established his ethos and humility, Gandhi moves on to telling the audience about his political intentions. The tone here shifts to be more matter-of-fact and deliberate. He begins by illustrating the path to peace that he sees, which involves severing ties with the British, simply because of the evils of their relationship. Gandhi explains that, as he sees it, once the relationship is "purified of greed", severing ties and recognizing India's independence should be easy. The tone here is still matter-of-fact, but also optimistic. Gandhi isn't mincing his words about about the "evils" that need to be combated, but he is hopeful that "promoting the common good of mankind" and "voluntary fellowship" is possible. Such a matter-of-fact tone makes it almost impossible to argue with Gandhi, making this extremely effective. But then, Gandhi crushes the optimism, almost appearing to play good-cop, bad cop with Lord Irwin. He says "But if you cannot ... deal with these evils", he will begin his protest with other members of the Ashram. The tone here is still matter-of-fact, Gandhi is merely telling Lord Irwin of what will happen -- that the law is iniquitous, that arresting him would do no good, but it's markedly less optimistic. This approach uses logos, demonstrating that Gandhi has thought through all of the possibilities, and showing that his intentions are sound and based in logic. Gandhi's expert use of his tone, and the way he crafts the argument to demonstrate the logic of his protest makes his argument all the more persuasive. 

Finally, to close off the argument, Gandhi returns to his original focus on humility. This time, he establishes humility by illustrating that he is open to alternative solutions. He tells Lord Irwin that if he has an alternative solution, and would like to avoid "unnecessary embarrassment", he'd be happy to avoid publishing the letter. He balances that with a plea, that if Lord Irwin doesn't have a solution to Gandhi's problems to "not deflect [Gandhi] from [his] course". This demonstrates that Gandhi is truly interested in finding solutions to the issues, and that his protests are not driven by vitriol or spite. By returning to the original theme of humility, Gandhi brings the letter to a close, making his position abundantly clear.

Altogether, Gandhi begins his letter with a humble tone, which he uses to develop ethos and illustrate his philosophy on non-violence. Then, he shifts to a more matter of fact tone, using logic and reasoning to present his arguments, and informing Lord Irwin and the public of his intentions to protest, and explaining why he thinks the protest will be effective. Finally, he concludes be returning to the original idea of humility, leaving as many options open to Lord Irwin as possible, to demonstrate that he's most interested in solutions. 
