After January 6th, calls for political unity have resounded through the hallowed halls of congress. President Joseph R. Biden’s inauguration speech was titled “Unity”, and called for Americans to unite, to heal after a treacherous assault on our democracy on the 6th. Indeed, many older folk have lamented that we’ve lost political unity -- under Bill Clinton, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was confirmed by a nearly unanimous Senate, 96-4. Today, Supreme Court Justices are confirmed in party line votes less than a hundred hours before election day. A reasonable conclusion from these events would be that we’d lost political unity. But that wouldn’t be an accurate conclusion. Political unity is overrated, and if we don’t identify the underlying issues this country faces and address them, instead relying on an aesthetic of unity and collaboration, the country will fall apart. 

It’s awfully strange how calls for unity only ever come from the party in power. Under Trump, we heard no shortage of conservative arguing that “He’s your president too, even if you don’t respect the person, you should respect the office and support him”. Naturally, the second Republicans lost control of government, these calls ceased. Instantly. Instead, we heard Joe Biden calling for unity, in an extremely well written 20 minute speech. Such a stark reversal would suggest that the reality is "unity" isn't an actual political position. It's a code for falling in line, accepting that a certain party has the power. And if you were someone who isn't particularly happy with either party -- a group of people which is at an all-time high -- call to fall in line and accept that a certain party has won might ring a bit hollow.

Today, we're in the middle of a pandemic. A pandemic that was remarkably poorly handled by our government at every level. At the federal level, the Trump administration consistently contradicted the scientists and Dr. Fauci, spread misinformation about masks, repeatedly hosted COVID Superspreader events, and had literally zero plan for vaccine distribution, to the point where they didn't even buy enough to vaccinate the entire population of the US. At the state level, though the response has been markedly better, it has still been confused. Despite being under a "stay-at-home order", no one seems to fully know what that means. Businesses are still open, are we allowed to patronize them, or not? At best, the state level response has been confused and inconsistent. In the meantime, we are facing a climate crises, which threatens human civilization on a scale never imagined before, leading to more severe wildfire seasons, more severe snowstorms, more severe droughts, more severe hurricanes, massive disruption to food supplies, and the decimation of delicately balanced ecosystems. We faced historic civil rights protests over the summer, in the wake of the brutal murder of George Floyd. And this just begins to skim the surface of the crises we face. In light of all this, can we really entertain calls for "unity"? The aesthetic of collaboration simply is not powerful enough to take on these very real challenges. We can't fall in line behind any of our elected leaders -- we need to keep them accountable. There are very specific policies they promised us, two-thousand dollar stimulus checks, a green energy based infrastructure plan, a commitment to ending police violence, and when politicians inexorably renege on their promises, we can't fall in line in the name of unity. We need to hold them accountable.

But there's an even more insidious connection here. There are several causes for the perceived lack of political unity today, but one of the crucial ones is the extent of corporate influence in politics. Following the heavily-criticized Supreme Court decision in _Citizen's United_, corporate money in politics has skyrocketed. Recently, the ride-share company Lyft came under fire from The Guardian for donating $5000 to the Texas Republican Party shortly before the party called for secession referendum to be placed on the ballot. This is far from an isolated incident. Another concerning example of the influence of corporate money in politics can be found in the Washington Post's "Afghanistan Papers", which revealed that lobbyists for the military industrial complex all but completely controlled congressional action in Afghanistan, pulling them along like dogs chasing a toy on a string, always dangling the prospect of victory right in front of them, if only Congress bought their technology. The growth of corporate money in politics is responsible for a massive chunk of the lack of political unity today. If certain politicians are virtually in the pockets of corporations, how can we expect them to represent our best interests? What incentive do they have to compromise and work across the aisle? So given that we can't easily change the influence of corporate money in politics, calls for unity amount to little more than calls to simply accede to the political whims of corporations. So long as insurance companies donate to politician's campaigns, those politicians are never going to vote for Medicare For All, even while from 45,000 people die every year from lack of health insurance and medical debt remains the single largest source of personal bankruptcies in the US. So long as fossil fuel companies donate to politician's campaigns, a Green New Deal is never going to happen, even while air pollution kills 7 million people worldwide and 68% of worldwide biodiversity has been lost in the last 50 years. We can't unite with these people. We need change, and we need change now. Unity, the aesthetic of collaboration, cannot solve these problems. 

The historian Eric Foner, an expert on the Reconstruction era in United States history, points out that we are at a very similar crossroads today as the United States was 150 years ago. Political machines and moneyed interests controlled politics, much like today. Right-wing white supremacist domestic terror was up, there were crises surrounding the election, and the country, following the Civil War, was immensely polarized. Nonetheless, as Foner points out, the solution was not merely unity. It was not merely accepting what had happened. Foner argues that accountability and change were necessary for the country to survive. The South needed to profoundly change it's way of life to continue forward, and needed to be held accountable for the atrocities it committed. We find ourselves at a similar crossroads today, and we need to recognize that merely adopting the aesthetic of collaboration and unity is not enough. We need substantive, systematic change, and only then can we possibly begin to come together. 

Despite calls from the president, political unity is overrated. At best, it's little more than a call to bend the knee, at worst, it's actively harmful to moving the country forward. Unity doesn't put bread on the table, unity doesn't put fires out, unity won't keep you warm while it snows in Texas. Unity is little more than a shield for politicians to hide behind. But as we face unprecedented crises, we can't let our politicians hide behind a shield. We can't simply unite and continue as though nothing has happened. We need change. 
