# Welcome Letter


Dear Mrs. Murray,

Honestly, the past 5 months have been kinda crazy. On one hand, they've been kinda chill, I've been able to do really whatever I want. I've been reading more books, I've had more time to mess around with cool programming projects. I've been able to exercise consistently, I've been started learning to drive with my dad, I'm talking to my cousins more. All that's been really great. I'm probably going to bore you with a bunch of details about those programming projects, so feel free to skip them.

The best moment was during one of the aforementioned programming projects. I spent a decent bit of time this summer building up a 3d ray tracer (think the software that Pixar uses to produce their films). Initially, I started with a really basic model following a random textbook I found online, but I've been adding various features over time. The most satisfying moment by far was solving a bug that I struggled with for like 3 weeks. The solution was really simple, but I couldn't for the life of me figure out why the mesh rendering wasn't working. Some of the triangles that made up the models just weren't showing up. In hindsight, the solution is really obvious, but it was a really satisfying moment. You can see some of the images I rendered here: https://github.com/ritobanrc/firework, but it's still in its really early stages. I want to mess around with fluid simulation, but that's gonna take a long time to tackle. 

My worst moments are definitely some of the stupid things I've done while learning to drive. The most embarrassing is probably the two times we went to Tyler mall. The first time, we'd ordered food from P.F. Changs, and its kidna awkward cause you have to go to the "exit" road, then turn left into this tiny side road into the P.F. Changs parking lot. We hadn't realized this, so we were looking around, and we'd kinda decided to leave the mall and come back from the other side. So I was going at maybe 25 mph leaving, the light was green, then my dad spotted that tiny side road. So then, stupidly, I decided to change lanes left without observing, then even more stupidly, I continued to drive across causing a pickup truck to slam the brakes. Anyway, that was just a one time thing, right? Wrong! A handful of weeks later, I'm significantly better at driving, we go back. This time, I'm hoping to prove myself. I'm not going to mess up again. Except.... just as I'm turning right from the same intersection onto the busy road, the light turns green, and I realize that the front of my car is sticking out. And I can't reverse back, there's another car really close behind me. So now I'm in this awkward situation where I'm forcing other cars to change lanes because of me. Fortunately, there's a kind bus driver who stops. Problem solved, right? Wrong! Cause I'm an idiot who doesn't notice that the bus has stopped for me, so my dad points it out, and by the time I'm able to act on that, the bus driver has gotten impatient and started to move off, and somehow, I'm in a worse position than I started in. That kinda sucked. Fortunately, last week, we went back to Tyler, and this time, I got through it safely, without any horrible situations. 

Fortunately, my family has been mostly safe. Even in India, where the government is slowly experiencing a fascist takeover, and a typhoon knocked a tree down right outside my grandmother's balcony last month, my family has mostly pulled through. The worst that happened was my cousin having to get surgery for tearing a tendon in her ankle while playing soccer, but fortunately, that surgery happened without complications.

Anyway, the world is crazy, but I'm kinda just going along in my own little bubble. I've spent probably thousands of hours more than I normally would in this little box with a bed, a desk, a chair, and a bunch of books. 

Thanks for reading this, even though it was mostly an unstructured ramble about my life,

Ritoban Roy-Chowdhury
