I apologize profusely for the length. I had intended this to be pretty short, but there's just so much to talk about, because there's so much in the series. This is going to probably end up as like a 5 paragraph essay. I suppose that's fitting, considering that the Wheel of Time was originally intended to be a 6 book series, but by the end, spanned 15 books and over 4.4 million words.


"The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again." With these words, Robert Jordan began every book of his 15 book fantasy epic, The Wheel of Time. One of the greatest contributions to American fantasy, it presents a more modern and realistic take on the genre that began with Tolkein. The Wheel of Time evokes the cyclical nature of time in Hinduism or Buddhism, and many of Jordan's other themes and imagery are also reminiscent of Eastern religions. It presents themes of balance, between the Creator and the Dark One, between two genders, between the magic systems, and the cultures in his world. However, among fantasy fans, the Wheel of Time is most noted for its detailed and realistic character arcs, the meticulously crafted cultures, and its magic system, being one of the first to feature a rules-based magic system.

The Wheel of Time is renown for it's complex character arcs. Because of its length, Robert Jordan was really able to develop his characters very effectively and naturally, giving even secondary characters really great arcs. The first book, the Eye of the World, pays homage to Tolkein's The Fellowship of the Ring, and is structured very similarly -- a magic user and the lost king come to a backwater village and whisk away several adolescents on an adventure to save the world. But even from the beginning, Jordan begins to subvert the trope, as the magic user, Moiraine, is initially not trusted, with good reason. But over the course of 14 books, Jordan transitions into a much more modern style of fantasy, with political intrigue and maneuvering, as each of our characters grow into, or are thrust into, positions of power and leadership, and must learn to accept that duty and wield it responsible. What Jordan manages to do particularly well is make this transition feel incredibly natural, with few of the plot conveniences that normally characterize these sorts of arcs. This is the aspect that is also most prevalent in my favorite book of the series, Book 11, The Knife of Dreams. This is the final book written entirely by Jordan himself, before his untimely demise (and the series was finished by equally talented an amazing author Brandon Sanderson, using Jordan's extensive notes), and the book features some of the best character growth in the series. Rand al'Thor, the "Dragon Reborn" (chosen one), begins to accept his station and come to terms with himself. Matrim Cauthon develops his relationship extensively, Perrin Aybara finally accepts his position as a leader, after saving his wife from being kidnapped, and Egwene al'Vere learns to navigate the politics of the White Tower (a group of secretive magic users), and many other characters have achingly touching moments. Overall, this book features some of the best character growth in the series, as all of the characters begin to move into position for the Last Battle.

Much like Tolkein extensively developed his languages, creating several Elvish languages with linguistic associations, Jordan is notable for his extremely well realized cultures. Superficially, Jordan merely created several minute details for each culture -- the architecture, food, clothing, government, economics, and customs of each, which are already a great boon to the story, allowing the reader to vividly imagine every scene. But the structure of each society plays into the overarching narrative very elegantly. The Aiel people, viewed as warlike savages by the rest of the world, are actually revealed to be extremely structured and organized, while still preserving a level of nomadic decentralization, preserving the freedom of each individual or group. This is contrasted with the jingoistic Seanchan empire, who invade, believing themselves to be the descendants of a long lost king, and have an extremely rigid social hierarchy. The role of magic users, or channelers, is also contrasted between these cultures, where the Aiel revere the channellers as Wise Ones, allowing them to advise the Clan Chief on certain matters and rule on others, the Seanchan enslave their channelers, treating them like animals to be used for war. The complex codes of honor of the Aiel and cutthroat politics of the Seanchan are just two examples of the many cultures throughout the Wheel of Time, making it an examination of the variety in culture never seen before in fantasy. 

Finally, the Wheel of Time features an wonderfully rich magic system, and one of the first hard magic systems in fantasy history. All magic is drawn from the One Power, a sort of infinite well of power, which is divided into male and female halves, called saidin and saidar, respectively. Each of these are further divided into the 5 elements, Air, Water, Earth, Fire, and Spirit, from which strands can be channeled to create weaves, which carry out the intended magic. The female channelers have organized themselves into various structures in the different societies, primarily, the Aes Sedai, who are secretive and mistrusted because of a history of meddling with politics of other nations. On the other hand, because of a mishap that occurred during Lews Therin's (the previous Dragon Reborn) quest to destroy the Dark One, saidin has been tainted by the Dark One, like an oil slick over a river of water, such that all male channelers are fated to go insane. This style of presenting a magic system, with hard rules within which the characters need to operate stands in stark contrast with previous magic systems, like those of Tolkein or C.S. Lewis, and allows characters to solve problems in often extremely satisfying and original ways.

MAJOR PLOT SPOILERS UP TO BOOK 12. PROCEED AT YOUR OWN RISK. Or just skip the context.

Finally, my favorite quote from the books come from the 12th book, The Gathering Storm. Rand al' Thor, the Dragon Reborn, has been slowly growing increasingly passionless and stoic, thinking that to win the Last Battle, he will need to be hard and abandon all emotion. This culminated in a horrific event where he almost murdered his own father, and fled to the base of Dragonmount, a mountain created by the death of his previous reincarnation, Lews Therin. Rand ascends the mountain, contemplating how he can become truly emotionless for the Last Battle, and why we live in the first place. Just as he reaches the summit, he arrives at the answer to both questions, that we live in order to love, and the cyclic nature of the Wheel of Time means we are given the opportunity to love again, given second changes, and that he shouldn't become hard, but rather open himself up to emotion and truly empathize with others. Thus, the final 3 lines of Book 12 are:

He regarded the world beneath him. The clouds above had finally broken, if only just above him. The gloom dispersed, allowing him to see the sun hanging just above.
Rand looked up at it. Then he smiled. Finally, he let out a deep-throated laugh, true and pure.
It had been far too long. 


Jordan begins be highlighting how Rand is above the world, literally (Dragonmount is the tallest mountain), but also signifies how Rand holds the fate of the world in his hands. Then, Jordan describes the clouds breaking, which have been been an oppressive and claustrophobic force, representative of the Dark One. Rand having come out of his depression and having accepted his role, finally becomes a force for good, dispersing the gloom around him and releasing the sun into this world that has been subjected to constant cloud cover for several months at this point. This sets a positive, warm mood. Rand then smiles and laughs, evoking Rand's realization that the point of life is to feel emotion. The laugh is described has deep-throated, suggesting that it's genuine and from the heart, and this interpretation is backed up by its description as "true and pure". Finally, Jordan reminds us of the journey taken, over the course of 12 books, of which for the last 6 or 7, Rand is been growing progressively more stolid. "It had been far too long" since Rand had felt such honest genuine emotion, had gone beyond considering his political situation as the Dragon Reborn. This moment represents the culmination of 12 books of buildup, after we have been through heaven and hell with this character. You can't help be empathize with his plight, which makes it unimaginable satisfying when it arrives at a resolution.
