# Essay

"Thank you for calling Great Benefit Inc. Your call is very important to us, please hold and one of our representatives will be on the line shortly." Poor experience with insurance companies is a ubiquitous experience, and Francis Ford Coppola's 1997 film _The Rainmaker_ tears into the world of corporate insurance hegemony and exploitation with unmitigated criticism, meticulous camera work, and impressive legal accuracy. The film, based on the John Grisham novel of the same name, follows a young Rudy Baylor, played by Matt Damon, as he litigates his first case out of law school, taking on the insurance conglomerate Great Benefit. Supporting Rudy is the affable and eccentric Deck Shifflet, played by Danny DeVito, who failed the bar exam six times, while opposing counsel for Great Benefit is lead by the confident but conniving Leo F. Drummond, played by Jon Voight. The film examines issues of insurance exploitation and bad faith, power imbalances, both between corporations and their clients, between abusive husbands and their spouses, and the importance legal activism and public interest litigation.

The movie opens to Rudy Baylor working as a bartender, in a bar owned by the J. Lyman Stone, also known as Bruiser. Bruiser, also the owner of a personal injury law firm, offers Rudy a position and introduces himself to Deck Shifflet, an associate and paralegal of Bruiser. Rudy meets Dot Black, and her son, Donny Ray, who is dying of leukemia after being denied treatment by Great Benefit, the Black's insurance company. Rudy agrees to work for them on contingency, but shortly thereafter, Bruiser is arrested and his office raided by the FBI, leading Rudy and Deck to setup a practice on their own. Rudy, having never gone to trial before, shows up to argue against Great Benefit's motion to dismiss. Unfortunately for Rudy, the judge, Harvey Hale is a staunch proponent of the tobacco lobby and is inclined to grant the motion to dismiss the case. Fortunately for Rudy, Judge Hale dies, and is replaced by Tyrone Kippler, played by Danny Glover, a former civil rights attorney who takes a special interest in the case. Judge Kippler, soon thereafter, schedules a deposition with Donny Ray on the following Thursday, despite Leo Drummond not being available, because "God knows there's enough of you guys to handle it." Following the deposition of Donny Ray, Rudy flies out to Oregon to depose several Great Benefit employees, but upon arriving, he finds out that all of the employees he intended to depose just happen to "no longer work" at Great Benefit. Unfortunately, soon after, Donny Ray dies of leukemia. Paralleling this plot line is Rudy's love interest, Kelly Riker, played by Claire Danes, an abused wife whom he meets in the hospital. Rudy persuades her to file for a divorce, leading to a confrontation with her boyfriend, Cliff, whom Rudy beats nearly to death. Kelly takes the blame for this incident, and is not prosecuted, as it's deemed to be self defense. Back at the Great Benefit trial, Leo Drummond continues with his unscrupulous tactics. First, he bugs Rudy and Deck's office, which backfires as Deck invents a plan to make it appear as though they're engaging in jury tampering. Afterwards, as trial begins to get underway, we see Rudy floundering, not yet familiar with the mannerisms of trial. He asks three leading questions on direct examination, and is called out for it, until the judge intervenes to help, while Drummond's cross examination is masterful, making it appear as though the Black family physician informed them that a bone marrow transplant would not actually help Donny Ray. The next witness is similar, the Great Benefit president, from whom Rudy extracts few concessions. In the meantime, Deck manages to track down Jackie Lemancyzk, one of the Great Benefit employees he intended to depose earlier, but was unable to. She presents a different version of the Employee Handbook, which included a clause to deny all claims. After some controversy regarding the ability to Jackie to testify, where Rudy is saved by Deck's knowledge of the rules of civil procedure, Rudy's direct examination of Jackie Lemancyzk is masterful, and reveals the extent of Great Benefit's exploitative, even sexually exploitative, tendencies. The following witness, Great Benefit President Wilfred Keeley's cross examination is even more effective, illustrating just how much Rudy has grown as a trial lawyer. For the first time, he has cases ready to show the judge (albeit with some help from now Caribbean fugitive Bruiser Stone), he's within the rules and has objections against him overruled, and he manages to prove that Great Benefit's president was not only aware of the great length's Great Benefit went to to avoid paying claims, but that he also personally profited off the sexual exploitation of Jackie Lemancyzk and others. The jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, awarding 50 million dollars in punitive damages. While Great Benefit manages to avoid paying the money by declaring bankruptcy, and FBI investigation into Great Benefit continues, and Rudy deciding to teach law, looks forward to a bright future with Kelly.


The opening montage, where Rudy first meets Bruiser, is masterfully crafted, with meticulous camera work and brilliant symbolism. It begins with cuts through Rudy in law school, Rudy as a bartender, and Rudy studying in the library and in the park, with a voice over from Rudy describing Rudy's life. Crucially, Rudy says "I've wanted to be a lawyer ever since I read about the civil rights lawyers in the '50s and '60s, and the amazing uses they found for the law." Right from the opening montage, the movie establishes the overarching theme of using the law to do good, immediately telling us that Rudy is going to be following in the footsteps of Thurgood Marshall and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, or even Gordon Hirabyashi or, more recently, Neal Katyal Kumar. It's these subtle details that give the movie it's tight-knit feeling, making it work as a since concise and complete story. This monologue stands in stark contrast with the next scene, featuring the office of Bruiser Stone -- the lawyer whom Rudy finds a job with. The camera, looking through Bruiser's shark tank alludes to the old joke about lawyers, "Why don't lawyers ever get eaten by sharks? It's a professional courtesy!". From there, as Rudy begins to discuss his employment with Bruiser, the notably camera is held level with Bruiser's desk, focussing in on his diamond ring, while when looking at Rudy, the camera is looking up at him. Bruiser, shortly thereafter, is arrested, leaving Rudy to fend for himself in the difficult world of trial practice. But his first appearance leaves an unmistakable mark in the viewer's mind, and when Great Benefit shows up, the viewer is left wondering: Who is truly worse? Is it the actual criminal, fleeing from the FBI that gives a fledgling lawyer a job and helps him file a case, or is it the company that exploits its workers, kills it's clients, and then gets away scott-free by declaring bankruptcy?

Rudy Baylor's first courtroom appearance is fraught with tension and uncertainty. The judge, who Deck Shifflet tells Rudy is a staunch supporter of the tobacco lobby, seems ready to grant the motion to dismiss the case. This is further complicated, as Bruiser Stone, the lawyer who filed the case, fleeing the FBI, doesn't show up to court, and the judge is infuriated that Rudy thinks he can argue in his court without a licence. Fortunately, the lead attorney for Great Benefit comes to the rescue, and offers to stand for Rudy, leading Judge Hale to administer the oath on the spot. Rudy's narration comments "Sworn in by a fool. And vouched for by a scoundrel." This entire scene does an extremely effective job of establishing a critique of capitalism, the extent to which money buys power. The judge is a supporter of the tobacco lobby, and yet, is constantly coughing and hacking. Even the mere allusion to lobbying establishes the crucial idea, that money buys power, often unethically. This is paralleled by Bruiser, an apparent gang leader whose fleeing from the FBI. If anyone can be called a "scoundrel", it's him. And yet, the movie suggests the Drummond is a scoundrel. Maybe Great Benefit and the cartel run by Bruiser aren't that different after all! This idea is best summarized in the voice-over immediately before Donny Ray's deposition, where Rudy "I'm looking at a team of lawyers who are pulling down a $1,000 an hour, and I hate them.  From their lofty perch, pissing down on the whole justice system with disdain.  I used to hate them, because I wasn't good enough for them.  Now, I hate them for who they represent and what they represent." They represent Great Benefit, an insurance megacorporation, but more fundamentally, they represent the idea that money should determine status. They, being wealthy, think themselves to be above the law, that they should be able to sexually exploit their workers, just because they have the money and can get away with it. _The Rainmaker_ tells the heroic story of an inexperienced lawyer taking them on and winning, of David winning against Goliath. 

Fundamentally, the movie is structured as a bildungsroman, or a coming of age story.  Rudy Baylor grows from a young and naive graduate into an effective attorney. They movie delightfully illustrates this though the sequence of trial scenes, going from Rudy being completely lost to a skillful attorney. One particular aspect of note is the legal accuracy. Where in many legal movies, the depositions and pre-trial motions aren't present, going from the crime to trial in days, if not hours, _The Rainmaker_ accurately depicts the process of depositions and arguing pre-trial motions. There are a number of other subtle details, like correct case citations, or references to the headnote, lawyers not entering the well, and the correct rules of evidence -- no leading questions on direct examination, that make the film feel that much more cohesive and enjoyable to watch. Rudy slowly grows into an effective trial lawyer, communicated with many of these same subtle details. Drummond's objections slowly go from being consistently sustained to being overruled. Rudy's examinations go from being largely ineffective to being extremely effective, even moving the microphone around with his binder to allow the witness to repeat testimony that's good for him. 

_The Rainmaker_ is a stellar movie, and I would strongly recommend it. In the middle of a pandemic, as more people lose health insurance, and the US uniquely bad in it's response, understanding the machinations of our healthcare system is of utmost importance. With meticulous camera movement, complex and interesting themes, and a heart wrenching plot, _The Rainmaker_ exposes the evil underpinnings of our insurance system for all to see. 






